The Salon.

The Salon was the epicenter of artistic expression and culture for the French people. Beginning in 1667 as a performance gallery showing for graduates of École des Beaux-Arts (a prestigious art institute in France), Salon soon became the exhibition hotspot for aspiring painters and sculptors; it was nearly impossible to be a renowned artist in France without having one's work proudly displayed among the best of what the country had to offer.

I say nearly, not necessary, because a certain group of artists in the 1870s rejected this notion. These artists painted for family, friends, beliefs, or individual growth, not for a panel of judges that would arbitrarily decide whether a piece was suitable for France's only art exhibition gallery, and thus rejected the notion that success is contingent on appearing in Salon. This group, now known as the Impressionists, shared a studio and presented their work collectively in a personal exhibition, dubbing themselves as Anonymous Society of Painters, Sculptors, and Printmakers, and debuted their first show nearly the same time as the Salon showing began.

The Impressionists' actions and bravery combined with their natural and honed talent fared well with the audience, receiving largely positive feedback from the showing. However, the criticism was relentless and brutal: the group's style was not well-understood with familiars of the typical French art in the time, and felt "incomplete", claiming the works were mere impressions of an image or motif rather than a vivid description.


The Impressionists' Style

What was it that made critics and judges of Salon so turned off by the works of these artists? For one, the Impressionists' broke long-standing conventions involving audience perspective and clear-cut visuals, instead opting for a more (in their words) "realistic portrait" of modern life. While France (and quite a large populus of the world for years before) had typically captured the beauty and perfectness of people and environments, Impressionists, quite literally, blurred the lines between the accurate portrayal of human life and the beauty behind the world: they abandoned idealized bodies and forms and threw out notions of symmetrical beings and bodies to further demonstrate their beliefs. The colors used in pieces such as rivers or mountains reflected the natural light at a specific point in the day, a deviation from the standard viridescent grass or the alluring midnight-tinted sky. Light had an enormous impact on the surrounding scenery, as mountains and cliffs seem much darker and the sky dimmer, a more accurate depiction of how the human eye perceives the surroundings.

Let's analyze the elements used in Claude Monet's Impression, Sunrise, the piece that earned him and his peers the title of "Impressionists"


Impression, Sunrise
